Add post about joining the ggplot2 team (#715)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/joining-ggplot2/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: joining-ggplot2
title: Joining the ggplot2 team
date: 2025-01-09
author: Teun van den Brand
description: >
    I joined the ggplot2 team and would like to share the experience.

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/person-holding-green-plant-on-black-pot-CbZh3kaPxrE
  author: Jonathan Kemper

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [other] 

> tags: []

Author: Not sure what to add as tag. I guess 'internship' it the closest pre-existing one?

Reviewer: yeah, I think that's ok even though you strictly aren't an intern. In spirit we are all alike :-)

---

<!--
TODO:
* [ ] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [ ] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [ ] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [ ] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [ ] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [ ] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package

> * [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`

Reviewer: Can I get you to tick off the things you've completed so I now if they've been taken care of?

-->

Hello there! I've been working on ggplot2 for a while now, and I'd like to tell you how that came about and what it is like.

## How I got involved

My journey into learning R started in 2017 during an internship at the EMBL-EBI.
The main gripe about base R plotting that drove me into ggplot2's arms were the arcane invocations to get anything else than one of the pre-approved chart types.
In contrast, ggplot2 absorbs a bunch of small paper cuts, is very compositional in nature while remaining highly customisable.
In a bid to "learn from the mistakes of others" rather than (continue to copiously) make my own, I became active on Stack Overflow answering questions and solving plotting issues. 
For posterity: this was in the days before you could ask an large language model for personalised advice and actual humans were equally frustrated on both sides of the question.

I was keeping track of solutions to common problems in a personal cookbook that had its own arcane invocations.

> To give a bit of flavour: much of the cookbook was about preparing gtables, the data structure that comes out of building a plot, for combining and aligning plots. ^[Luckily, we don't have to think about this *at all*, thanks to the [patchwork](https://patchwork.data-imaginist.com/) package!]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give a bit of flavour: much of the cookbook was about preparing gtables (the data structure that comes out of building a plot) for combining and aligning plots. ^[Luckily, we don't have to think about this *at all*, thanks to the [patchwork](https://patchwork.data-imaginist.com/) package!]
```

The cookbook eventually grew into my first ggplot2 extension package: [ggh4x](https://teunbrand.github.io/ggh4x/).
Perhaps that package would be best subtitled: 'Remedies to my common ggplot2 ailments'.
It contains a bunch of miscellaneous functions ranging from reorganising facets to putting minor ticks on the axes.

> Simultaneously this was also a downside, as ggh4x lacked any sense of scope (and still does, as befits any first package).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nature of the package was also its downside, as ggh4x lacked any sense of scope (and still does, as befits any first package).
```

> Around the time I was really getting into ggplot extensions, Gina Reynolds had started organising a meeting for people who build ggplot2 extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Around the time when I was really getting into ggplot extensions, Gina Reynolds had started organising a meeting for people who build ggplot2 extensions.
```

Reviewer: Maybe a link to Gina's socials?

It is an interesting place to meet others and hear about their packages and how they face interacting with the ggplot2 extension system.
I started attending with some degree of regularity and made a discussion place on GitHub.
We now use this for general exchange of ideas, but also package specific issues.

Meanwhile, the questions on Stack Overflow kept directing my attention at the ggplot2 issue tracker every once in a while.
After lurking in there for a bit, I started my first informal contributions to ggplot2 itself by answering the simple stuff just as I did on Stack Overflow.

> It may not seem like much of a contribution, but in retrospect, answering issues helps triaging them: it divorces those issues who need additional changes in ggplot2 from those that do not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may not seem like much of a contribution, but in retrospect, answering issues helps triaging them: it separate those issues that need additional changes in ggplot2 from those that do not.
```

In 2022, I commented "I'd be willing to take a stab at this" on an issue proposing a large refactor of the guide system.
I like to think it was this precise moment that Thomas, the project lead after having taken over for Hadley, took notice and later invited me to join the team^[How much this actually reflects any truth is for any of us to guess and for Thomas to know. Later, I learned that this was also [how Thomas himself was roped into the project](https://www.data-imaginist.com/posts/2016-10-31-becoming-the-intern/)!].
This new guide system ended up laying the foundation for [legendry](https://teunbrand.github.io/legendry/), so it wasn't entirely out of unselfish reasons that I volunteered.
At any rate, this is a great opportunity to fill big shoes on a major R project, so I'm very excited to have joined!

## Becoming an insider

Part of being on the team is straightforward. 
You triage issues. 
You fix bugs. 
You implement new features.
At the point that I joined, I had already done these things as an outsider.

> The only thing that really changes is that you get the keys of the kingdom: you can now close issues and merge pull requests ^[After review though. You're not given *that* much power!].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only thing that really changes is that you get the keys to the kingdom: you can now close issues and merge pull requests ^[After review though. You're not given *that* much power!].
```

I had interacted with the other active maintainers before, so I wasn't a completely alien actor, but I felt some unclarity lingered longer than it ought have.
Perhaps I should more assertively have introduced myself ^[But I'm not celebrated for my social graces :)].

However, by the time posit::conf(2024) was over, I've met 6 out of the 9 other authors in person.
I have more thoughts about conf and my first time in the United States, but it has been amazing to meet all these people in person whose work you've been admiring for a while!

## Maintaining ggplot2

The ggplot2 package has both the blessing and the curse of being a popular package.
One the one hand, it is a blessing that people care about the project, post issues that they find and make intermittent contributions.
The curse is that it is such a staple in the R ecosystem, that almost any change will inadvertently affect somebody else's code.
Not only because ggplot2 is widely used, but also because people have been ...creative... with how they are using ggplot2.
The art of making changes is to largely affect plots in a good way.

The first big project I was rummaging through was the guide system I proposed to rewrite.

> The guide system was never been advertised as an official extension point, but naturally that didn't preclude people from using it as an extension point anyway.^[I don't have a moral high ground here: I was one of the worst offenders!]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The guide system had never been advertised as an official extension point, but naturally that didn't preclude people from using it as an extension point anyway.^[I don't have a moral high ground here: I was one of the worst offenders!]
```
